.TH RIND-SYSPERMS 1 "2026-06-07" "rind" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rind-sysperms \- manage access permissions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rind sysperms grant
.I subject
.I permission
.RB [ \-g ]
.br
.B rind sysperms revoke
.I subject
.I permission
.RB [ \-g ]
.br
.B rind sysperms show
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR user ]
.RB [ \-\-group
.IR group ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rind sysperms
manages access control entries in the daemon's permission store. Permissions control which users or groups can perform privileged actions such as managing services, setting facets, or escalating privileges.
.PP
When invoked as
.B sysperms
(directly), the same subcommands apply.
.SS grant
Grant a permission to a user or group.
.TP
.I subject
User name or group name to grant the permission to.
.TP
.I permission
Permission name (e.g.,
.BR SystemServices ,
.BR FacetWrite ,
.BR Login ,
.BR Run0 ,
.BR Network ).
.TP
.B \-g\fR,\fP \-\-group
Treat
.I subject
as a group name instead of a user name.
.SS revoke
Revoke a previously granted permission.
.TP
.I subject
User name or group name.
.TP
.I permission
Permission name to revoke.
.TP
.B \-g\fR,\fP \-\-group
Treat
.I subject
as a group name.
.SS show
Display current permission grants.
.TP
.BI \-\-user " user"
Show permissions for a specific user.
.TP
.BI \-\-group " group"
Show permissions for a specific group.
.PP
If neither
.B \-\-user
nor
.B \-\-group
is specified, all permissions are displayed.
.SH SYSTEM PERMISSIONS
.TP
.B SystemServices
Allows managing system services (ID 1000).
.TP
.B Login
Allows user login (ID 1001).
.TP
.B Run0
Allows running as root (ID 1002).
.TP
.B Network
Allows network configuration (ID 1003).
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
rind sysperms grant makano SystemServices
rind sysperms grant admins FacetWrite \-g
rind sysperms revoke makano Run0
rind sysperms show \-\-user makano
rind sysperms show
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rind (1),
.BR rind-sysman (1),
.BR rind-syssess (1)
