.TH RIND-SYSSESS 1 "2026-06-07" "rind" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rind-syssess \- manage user sessions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rind syssess logout
.br
.B rind syssess login
.br
.B rind syssess shell
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rind syssess
manages user login sessions within the rind init system. It provides commands for logging out, prompting for login credentials, and starting a user shell.
.PP
When invoked as
.B syssess
(directly), subcommands are parsed from the command line.
.SS logout
End the current user session by sending a logout request to the daemon. Reads the
.B USER
and
.B SESSION_ID
environment variables to identify the session.
.SS login
Prompt for username and password on the current TTY, then send a login request to the daemon. On success, the screen is cleared and the session is established. On failure, the prompt repeats.
.PP
The target TTY is determined by the
.B RIND_LOGIN_TTY
environment variable. If unset, defaults to
.IR /dev/tty1 .
.PP
If
.B RIND_LOGIN_TTY
starts with
.IR seat ,
it is translated to the corresponding TTY number (e.g.,
.I seat0
becomes
.IR /dev/tty1 ).
.SS login (TUI mode)
When
.B RIND_LOGIN_TUI=1
is set, the login prompt uses a centered terminal UI instead of the plain getty-style prompt.
.PP
The TUI renders:
.IP \(bu 4
A bordered box centered on screen (80% of terminal width, max 80 columns)
.IP \(bu 4
Hostname banner at the top of the box
.IP \(bu 4
.B /etc/issue
content displayed inside the box
.IP \(bu 4
rind version string
.IP \(bu 4
Username and password prompts
.IP \(bu 4
Subtle background decoration
.PP
The background can be replaced with an external command by setting
.BR RIND_LOGIN_BG_CMD .
For example:
.RS
.nf
RIND_LOGIN_BG_CMD="pipes \-t 0 \-c 4 \-p 20"
.fi
.RE
.PP
The background process is spawned when the login screen appears and killed when authentication completes.
.SS shell
Start a user shell for the current session. Reads session parameters from the
.B RIND_USER_ACTIVE
environment variable (JSON format) or falls back to
.BR RIND_LOGIN_TTY ,
.BR USER ,
and
.BR SESSION_ID .
.PP
The shell process:
.IP 1. 4
Opens the session TTY and acquires it via
.BR TIOCSCTTY .
.IP 2. 4
Looks up the user's shell, UID, GID, and home directory from
.IR /etc/passwd .
.IP 3. 4
Loads environment variables from
.I ~/.env
(or
.I /root/.env
for root).
.IP 4. 4
Starts the user's login shell with clean environment, proper UID/GID, and the session TTY as stdin/stdout/stderr.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B USER
Current username (used by
.BR logout ).
.TP
.B SESSION_ID
Numeric session identifier (used by
.BR logout ).
.TP
.B RIND_LOGIN_TTY
Target TTY for login and shell. Default:
.IR /dev/tty1 .
.TP
.B RIND_USER_ACTIVE
JSON object with session parameters:
.IR tty ,
.IR seat ,
.IR username ,
.IR session_id .
.TP
.B RIND_LOGIN_TUI
Set to
.B 1
to enable the TUI login screen.
.TP
.B RIND_LOGIN_BG_CMD
Command to run as the TUI background (e.g.,
.IR "pipes \-t 0" ).
.TP
.B RIND_LOGIN_HOSTNAME
Override the hostname displayed in the login prompt.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/issue
System banner displayed before the login prompt (both TUI and non-TUI modes).
.TP
.I /etc/passwd
User database for shell, UID, GID, and home directory lookup.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
rind syssess login
rind syssess shell
rind syssess logout

# TUI mode
RIND_LOGIN_TUI=1 rind syssess login

# TUI with custom background
RIND_LOGIN_TUI=1 RIND_LOGIN_BG_CMD="pipes \-t 0 \-c 4" rind syssess login
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rind (1),
.BR rind-run0 (1),
.BR rind-sysperms (1)
