.TH RIND 1 "2026-06-07" "rind" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rind \- Rust Init Daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rind
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rind
is the command-line interface to the rind init daemon. It communicates with the running daemon via IPC over a Unix domain socket and dispatches commands for service management, session control, log viewing, and system operations.
.PP
When invoked as
.B rind
with a subcommand, it dispatches to the corresponding applet. When the binary name matches an applet name directly (e.g., via a symlink), that applet is invoked without the subcommand prefix.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B rind run0 [ARGS...]
Escalate to root privileges and execute a command. See
.BR rind-run0 (1).
.TP
.B rind syslogs [OPTIONS]
View and tail system logs. See
.BR rind-syslogs (1).
.TP
.B rind sysunit \fIcommand\fR [OPTIONS]
Manage services, units, and scopes. See
.BR rind-sysunit (1).
.TP
.B rind sysinvoke \fINAME\fR \fIPAYLOAD\fR [\fB\-\-scope\fR \fISCOPE\fR]
Send an arbitrary IPC action to a named endpoint.
.TP
.B rind sysperms \fIcommand\fR [OPTIONS]
Manage access permissions. See
.BR rind-sysperms (1).
.TP
.B rind syssess \fIcommand\fR
Manage user sessions. See
.BR rind-syssess (1).
.TP
.B rind reload\-units
Signal the daemon to reload all unit definitions from disk. Triggers a Collect cycle without a full reboot.
.TP
.B rind soft\-reboot
Restart the daemon runtime without exiting the process. Re-runs the Runtime cycle.
.TP
.B rind reboot
Reboot the system.
.TP
.B rind shutdown
Power off the system.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RIND_SOC_PATH
Path to the daemon's Unix domain socket. Default:
.IR /tmp/rind.sock .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/log/rind/
Default log directory for
.BR rind-syslogs (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rind-run0 (1),
.BR rind-syslogs (1),
.BR rind-sysunit (1),
.BR rind-sysinvoke (1),
.BR rind-sysperms (1),
.BR rind-syssess (1)
