.TH RIND-SYSLOGS 1 "2026-06-07" "rind" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rind-syslogs \- view and tail system logs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rind syslogs
.RB [ \-l
.IR level ]
.RB [ \-\-target
.IR target ]
.RB [ \-\-message
.IR message ]
.RB [ \-\-since
.IR timestamp ]
.RB [ \-\-current ]
.RB [ \-\-field
.IR KEY=VALUE ]
.RB [ \-n
.IR limit ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-\-less ]
.RB [ \-\-poll\-ms
.IR ms ]
.RB [ \-\-dir
.IR path ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rind syslogs
reads and displays log entries from rind's binary log files. By default it shows the most recent entries from
.IR /var/log/rind/ .
.PP
Log entries are stored in a custom binary format with CRC verification. Each entry contains a timestamp, level, target, message, and optional key-value fields.
.PP
When invoked as
.B syslogs
(directly), the same options apply.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-dir " path"
Directory containing
.I .rlog
files. Default:
.IR /var/log/rind .
.TP
.BI \-l " level" "\fR,\fP \-\-level " level
Minimum log level to display. Values:
.BR trace ,
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR warn ,
.BR error ,
.BR fatal .
.TP
.BI \-\-target " target"
Filter entries whose target contains
.IR target .
.TP
.BI \-\-message " message"
Filter entries whose message contains
.IR message .
.TP
.BI \-\-since " timestamp"
Show entries with timestamp greater than or equal to
.IR timestamp
(Unix seconds).
.TP
.B \-\-current
Show only entries from the current boot. Resolves the boot start time from
.IR /proc/stat .
.TP
.BI \-\-field " KEY=VALUE"
Filter entries where the given field equals
.IR VALUE .
Can be specified multiple times; all must match.
.TP
.BI \-n " limit" "\fR,\fP \-\-limit " limit
Maximum number of entries to display. Default:
.BR 200 .
.TP
.B \-f\fR,\fP \-\-tail
Tail mode: continuously poll for new entries and display them as they appear. Ctrl+C to stop.
.TP
.B \-\-less
Pipe output through
.BR less (1)
with color support. Combined with
.BR \-\-tail ,
.B less
is started with
.B +F
for live following.
.TP
.BI \-\-poll\-ms " ms"
Polling interval in milliseconds when in tail mode. Default:
.BR 500 .
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Each log entry is displayed as:
.PP
.RS
[LEVEL TIMESTAMP TARGET] message
.RE
.PP
If the entry has fields, they are displayed on the next line indented:
.PP
.RS
  fields key1=value1 key2=value2
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
rind syslogs
rind syslogs \-\-level warn
rind syslogs \-\-tail \-\-less
rind syslogs \-\-field service=my\-service \-n 50
rind syslogs \-\-current \-\-target net
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rind (1),
.BR rind-sysman (1)
