.TH RIND-sysunit 1 "2026-06-07" "rind" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rind-sysunit \- manage services, units, and scopes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rind sysunit start
.I name
.RB [ \-t
.IR type ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-\-scope
.IR scope ]
.br
.B rind sysunit stop
.I name
.RB [ \-t
.IR type ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-\-scope
.IR scope ]
.br
.B rind sysunit show
.RI [ name ]
.RB [ \-u ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-x ]
.RB [ \-m ]
.RB [ \-c ]
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR type ]
.RB [ \-\-scope
.IR scope ]
.br
.B rind sysunit scope create
.I name
.RB [ \-\-lifetime\-state
.IR state ]
.RB [ \-\-attr
.IR KEY=VALUE ]
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR user ]
.br
.B rind sysunit scope destroy
.I name
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rind sysunit
manages services, sockets, units, and scopes within the rind daemon.
.PP
When invoked as
.B sysunit
(directly), subcommands are parsed from the command line.
.SS start
Start a service, socket, or other unit by name.
.TP
.I name
Name of the unit to start. Units are addressed as
.IR group:name .
Scoped units use
.IR group:name@scope .
.TP
.BI \-t " type" "\fR,\fP \-\-type " type
Unit type. Values:
.BR service " (default),"
.BR svc ,
.BR socket ,
.BR soc .
.TP
.B \-p\fR,\fP \-\-persist
Persist the start action across reloads.
.TP
.BI \-\-scope " scope"
Target scope namespace. Default:
.IR static .
.SS stop
Stop a running service, socket, or other unit.
.TP
.I name
Name of the unit to stop.
.TP
.BI \-t " type" "\fR,\fP \-\-type " type
Unit type (same as
.BR start ).
.TP
.B \-f\fR,\fP \-\-force
Force stop even if dependencies are active.
.TP
.B \-p\fR,\fP \-\-persist
Persist the stop action across reloads.
.TP
.BI \-\-scope " scope"
Target scope namespace.
.SS show
Display information about units, services, sockets, facets, or networks.
.TP
.I name
Optional name to show a specific unit. If omitted, lists all units.
.TP
.B \-u\fR,\fP \-\-unit
Show unit summary (services, sockets, mounts, facets counts).
.TP
.B \-s\fR,\fP \-\-service
Show detailed service information including recent logs.
.TP
.B \-x\fR,\fP \-\-socket
Show socket information.
.TP
.B \-m\fR,\fP \-\-mount
Show mount information.
.TP
.B \-c\fR,\fP \-\-facet
Show facet (state) information with branching details.
.TP
.B \-n\fR,\fP \-\-network
Show network interface information.
.TP
.B \-p\fR,\fP \-\-port
Show network port information. Combined with
.BR \-n ,
shows netports.
.TP
.BI \-t " type" "\fR,\fP \-\-type " type
Show entities of a specific type.
.TP
.BI \-\-scope " scope"
Target scope namespace.
.SS scope create
Create a new dynamic scope namespace.
.TP
.I name
Scope name.
.TP
.BI \-\-lifetime\-state " state"
Facet that controls the scope's lifetime. When the facet is removed, the scope is destroyed.
.TP
.BI \-\-attr " KEY=VALUE"
Scope attribute. Can be specified multiple times. Common attributes:
.BR user ,
.BR units_dir .
.TP
.BI \-\-user " user"
Shorthand for
.BR "\-\-attr user=\fIuser\fR" .
.SS scope destroy
Destroy a dynamic scope and its associated metadata.
.TP
.I name
Scope name to destroy. The
.I static
scope cannot be destroyed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
rind sysunit start my\-service
rind sysunit stop web\-socket \-t socket
rind sysunit show \-\-service my\-service
rind sysunit show \-u
rind sysunit scope create makano \-\-attr user=makano
rind sysunit scope destroy makano
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rind (1),
.BR rind-sysperms (1),
.BR rind-syssess (1)
